
Contemporary BIPOC Representation in Media

Originally published in the VTPOC newsletter, May 31, 2023

We all know the representation matters. Unfortunately, there still remains immense backlash when major companies like Walt Disney work to improve racial representation in their productions. Outrage from the right wing about non-white, male, cis/het casting could be seen as far back as 2009 when attempts to write BIPOC leading roles were first made by the company in The Princess and the Frog. More recent examples include Disney casting Daisy Ridley, a woman, as the lead in the latest Star Wars trilogy in 2015, along with BIPOC costars John Boyega and Kelly Marie Tran. All three actors received an incalculable amount of online hate simply for reading their scripts, prompting them to deactivate social media for a period of time.

Disney’s latest push for representation comes in the form of a live action remake for The Little Mermaid, releasing May 26. Black singer and actress Halle Bailey was cast as Ariel, whose original depiction in literature and in the 1994 animated film was as a pale Danish girl. This led to a firestorm on social media – 2 million dislikes on Youtube and comments claiming white erasure from right-wing extremists? But it’s the implications of this movie on the next generation of young Black people that matter most. The representation of diverse identities in media is crucial for promoting inclusivity and understanding in the real world.

The emergence of Rap in the late 80s and early 90s and Hip-hop music in the late 90s have significant players in BIPOC artists being able to express themselves and be heard by other communities. The genres began as a response to the lack of representation and positive portrayal of Black and Latino communities in mainstream media, and provide a platform for artists to share their lived experiences from their perspectives. The influence of hip-hop has expanded beyond just music, and has become a cultural phenomenon that has had a real impact on shaping the representation of BIPOC identities globally, for the better.

However, casting a Black actress as a historically white character does not relay the BIPOC experience as clearly as in music, especially when the film is written and directed by white people. In the case of The Little Mermaid, though, that is not really the point. Critics claim Bailey’s casting was an unnecessary change to appeal to a liberal audience, and while you can’t put that past Disney, there’s no doubt that she appears to fit the role well. In the case of fantasy genres, casting should prioritize actors who can best fit the character, not the character’s appearance. Unnecessary outrage about a BIPOC actor being cast in a historically white role in fantasy genres is baseless and ultimately counterproductive to promoting diversity and inclusivity in media.

It would also be absurd to not acknowledge the modern critical dogma, or belief, of the fairytale as an allegory for the struggles of queerness in Denmark when the story was first published by Hans Christian Andersen in 1836. Not including research into the author’s personal life and letters, it tells the story of a character forcefully separated from the rest of humanity which she desperately wants to be a part of. She’s put in a position in which she has to hide her true self to be accepted, and eventually dies because she’s not able to bridge the divide. If this reading is as intended, then it’s the 1994 adaptation that strays further from the source material than the 2023 remake does from its own.

In a recent series of interviews VT PoC conducted, Vermont based BIPOC artists were asked to share their thoughts on the subject of media representation of artists and actors of color. Poet, speaker, and activist Rajnii Eddins urged the BIPOC community to take the higher ground. He commented:

“We [as BIPOC] play a pivotal role in modeling what true humanity can look like. By humanizing, sensitizing, and holding space for even those who don’t respect us… [Critic’s] insecurity keeps us from having our true contributions being shown. It stops us from having representation in any capacity. ”

The spotlight article for the month of May also focuses on Bennington-based visual artist Ahmad Yassir, who emphasized the importance of resilience in the face of discrimination. Ahmad stated: “It’s important to approach any challenges or barriers with a sense of resilience and determination. As a BIPOC individual, it may be necessary to advocate for oneself and seek out opportunities that may not be immediately apparent. However, by building strong relationships with the local community and actively pursuing one’s goals, it is possible to thrive and make a positive impact in Vermont.” You can read more on our conversation with Ahmad in our upcoming spotlight article on him and his work.
